It is going to be with you this morning as we worship together.
Today we're going to be talking about prayer, but I want to kind of unpack for you today why prayer matters in the context where we are.
So a few weeks back, we started a sermon series based off
I think one more important verses in the Bible, John 17-3.
In John 17-3, Jesus, that's Jesus' high priestly prayer.
Jesus in John 17 is praying for all the church, for the church of that age, the apostles.
He's praying for us now.
He's praying specifically for those who would come after these apostles.
And one of the things he says in chapter 17, verse three, is he says this.
He says, I pray that they may know eternal life, which is knowing the Father,
in the Son who he has sent.
So eternal life, for us as Christian, is not a one day down the road thing, but it's a thing we can experience now.
So like, just now, when you're worshiping and you feel something inside of you, the Holy Spirit, encouraging you or pushing you or pulling you or working on you, what you're feeling is a foretaste of eternity.
Blessed assurance, Jesus is mine.
Oh, what a foretaste of glory divine.
Every time you experience that little nudge of the spirit, that's a foretaste of heaven.
So if eternity is about knowing Jesus, knowing the Father and knowing the Son, well, then how do we do that?
So the three weeks following leading up to Ash Wednesday, we're talking about that.
How do I believe that we know the Father and the Son who he has sent?
I told the story in traditional when I started this series last week.
I had a mentor, a spiritual director, a pastor who kind of helped guide me spiritually.
He would always give me good counsel, good wisdom.
And every conversation we had would end with these words.
He would always say to me, read your Bible, pray, and stay in love with God's people.
I'm like, ooh, that's good advice.
And I've really tried to build my life around that bit of advice.
So how do I think we experience God fully?
How do we know Jesus?
I believe we know Jesus.
We experience Jesus most fully.
through reading our Bible, we talked about last week, praying or talking about this week.
And then next week, the phrase he used was stay in love with God's people.
Well, that's kind of wordy.
So I said, well, go to church, but go to church doesn't really encapsulate it because when I say go to church, and this is next week sermon, when I say go to church, I don't mean so much go to church as much as I mean, be the church.
Be the church.
And I think we are the church through three things, which will, well, that's next week's sermon.
Let's not get ahead of ourselves.
So today we're talking about prayer.
We're talking about why prayer matters, what prayer is about, what is this whole thing about.
So we're talking about prayer today.
So our passage of scripture, which Ginger has already told us about, is gonna come from Philippians.
Philippians chapter four, read chapter four versus four through seven.
Rejoice in the Lord always.
Again, I will say rejoice.
Let your gentleness be known to everyone.
The Lord is near.
Do not worry about anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your request be made known to God.
And the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will guard your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.
This is the word of God to the people of God.
Thanks be to God.
So if you have
have the joy, and it's a true joy.
It's one of life's great joys.
Having teenagers who drive, you may know, particularly if it's been recent, about this wonderful little invention called Life 360.
I want to see some heads nod.
For those of you who don't know what Life 360 is, Life 360 is an app.
You put on everyone in your family.
Well, we put it on all of our family's vehicles.
And what this app does is it just basically lets you track where family is.
And when our kids first started driving, that was a very helpful tool.
We would have know what they were doing.
And then the thing with life 360 is it not only lets you track them, but it like tells you other things like they drove too fast.
I'd get that warning more than my kids do, except
Y'all will hope they found this funny.
So me, I know my son Thomas is studying aviation up at Delta State.
He's studying to be a pilot.
And so, well, guess what?
When he's moving in his airplane, we can track him there too.
And like, we get a lot of going to fast warnings after he's gotten done flying.
But so we put it on our kids' phones when they started driving, and it's been very helpful when they're driving around, but we did when our kids got to college, the decision and how they and I made was we turned off notifications of their movement when they went to college.
Because my parents didn't need to know what I was doing in college, and so, you know, kids deserve some privacy when they're in college to learn and to grow.
But it is, it is useful.
And so I think about lie 360 in the times that I've flown recently.
If you have flown in the past pre-life 360 days, you know, there's a little routine you follow when you're flying.
Usually when you're taxing out to fly, you text your loved ones.
Hey, taking off now.
Love you.
I'll talk to you when we land.
That's kind of the tradition.
So I would do that.
I would text my family, our family group, said, hey guys, take it off soon.
Talk to me, touchdown.
Love you.
Why do all that?
Well, then we touch down.
And then, you know, you know, they say don't turn your phone early, but you know, I turn my own as soon as we touch down, you know, like I'm turning my phone on early because, you know, we're going to be sitting in our seats for another 30 minutes miles.
We'll get on Facebook.
And so I'll turn my phone on and then I'll text my family.
Hey guys, we touched down in wherever.
In the last few times, I'll get a text from my wife saying, Oh, we know life 360 already told us.
I'm like, well, that's no fun.
You know, I wanted to tell you, I wanted to be the one to tell you that we touched down.
I don't need big brother telling me, telling my family when I've touched down.
Of course, it's a big brother that we willingly put on our phone.
So I guess it is kind of our fault.
But like, I don't know why that bothered me, but it's like it removed part of the family tradition and part of the family presence.
Chat GPT took the place of my reaching out to my family.
To let, I think I said chat GPT.
Life 360, it's all the same.
It's all the same.
It's all AI.
Took the place of me reaching out to the family to say, hey guys, I'm here, I'm safe, all as well.
There's something about that presence with each other, isn't it?
There's something, isn't there something powerful, mystical even, about hearing the voice of the person you love?
You know, think about it.
When you've had a tough time, whose voice do you want to hear?
Hopefully your spouse, for some of it is our parents.
I was telling somebody, y'all know I lost my mama a couple years ago, there's not hardly a Sunday that I'll leave this place where I am not out of habit tempted to call my mama.
and tell her how church went that day.
Because for almost 30 years till she passed, every Sunday we had that conversation on the way home, how church go, oh, you know, this is what happened.
So that presence matters.
Prayer is interesting, friends.
Prayer is interesting.
There are many times as a pastor, I get told by people, we know preacher, I can't pray.
And what people mean by that is they can't pray publicly.
Because most people's largest fear is public speaking.
And praying in front of people is a whole nother can of worms.
Some of y'all may remember a guy by the name of Bill Moyers.
I don't know if that name means anything to you.
Moyers was a TV journalist for a long time, but years ago, he was President Johnson's LBJ.
He was his press secretary.
And one of those early prayer breakfast was being held.
President Johnson asked Bill Moyers to pray.
So Moyers prayed.
And if you know for reading about LBJ, LBJ was very gruff.
Not exactly warm and fuzzy if you know your American history.
And after Johnson prayed, LBJ went, Moyers, I couldn't hear you.
To which Moyers says, that's okay, sir.
I wasn't talking to you.
Yes.
That's prayer.
Public prayer, even public prayer is not about the audience that hears you, but is about the God that you're talking to.
Prayer is about presence.
We get in trouble when we worry about the words.
I remember when I first got saved, I got saved when I was a senior in high school.
And I was willing to use a budget to determine, Lord, Lord, jerk to not in me.
Like, I once was lost, but now I'm found, I once was blind, but now I see, I feel that.
Cause when I was lost, I was lost.
When Lord got hold to me, He changed my whole everything about me.
And I remember, I got asked to pray one time at a little thing in our school.
And so I was praying, and I was just praying and praying and praying and praying and praying and praying and praying and praying and praying and praying.
It went on forever.
And when I finished my prayer, when my buddies in the back yelled out, and Lord,
Let Andy do his devotional at home next time.
Prayer is not about what we say.
Now, let's be clear.
We can grow in our prayer life.
Remember what the disciples said to Jesus before he taught them the Lord's Prayer?
The disciples came to Jesus and said, Lord, teach us to pray.
So teach us to pray.
And then he said, when you pray, pray like this, our Father who art in heaven.
So Jesus gave the disciples a method to pray.
Now, let's be clear.
Most of the time when I'm praying in church, I'm praying what's called extemporaneously.
I very rarely will pray written prayers in worship.
Usually I'll just pray with to my heart.
But if you follow my prayer, my prayers have a pattern.
I have a very, every Sunday, when I pray in particularly traditional worship, the pastoral prayer, I have a pattern.
We worship God, we thank God, we pray for the sick, we confess our sins.
That's my pattern every time I pray in public.
at that same pattern every time I pray.
So we can learn to pray better or more effectively or feel more comfortable with it.
There is no shame.
I'm a big fan of books of prayer liturgies.
Every morning I pray through the Book of Common Prayer's morning office.
There is great wisdom we can learn from written prayers, from prayers that have been written by others.
That's basically what the entire Book of Psalms is.
Psalms is nothing but written prayers that were written by David and others.
So if you find comfort and solace in praying prayers that are handed to you by the church, either our United Methodist Church or the Catholic Church, the Episcopal Church, the Presbyterian Church, that's awesome.
We can learn from the prayers that have been handed to us.
But so it's not an either or.
It is a
learning from how others have prayed before us, but also having access to the Father now through our own prayer life.
It's both.
One of my favorite methods of prayer is has the acronym acts, like the Acts of the Apostle, A-C-T-S.
It's a very common prayer method that's easy to learn.
A is for adoration.
Every prayer should have some time of praise to God.
God thank you for who you are.
Thank you for
what you've done.
Thank you for who they thank you for your holy, your beautiful, your lovely, adoring God, worshiping God.
But there should also be a time of confession.
If we can, the Bible says if we confess our sins, he who is faithful and just will cleanse us from all in righteousness.
We should confess our sins not because our confession of sin does not trigger God's forgiveness.
Let me explain that.
If you have, because sometimes we're worried where I didn't confess all my sins, is God gonna smite me?
If you have to properly confess every sin, then what is it that earned your forgiveness?
Your proper confession, right?
If you have to do this right to be forgiven, then your actions are the one that has secured that forgiveness.
Our confession does not trigger God's forgiveness.
We're not in heaven making God forgive us.
God does not forgive us because of our perfect action.
God forgives us because of His perfect action in Jesus Christ.
If you have to do one thing to make God forgive you, then what you're saying is Jesus didn't do enough.
You're saying, it's not Jesus equals forgiveness.
It's Jesus plus my perfect action equals forgiveness.
And that's not right.
Bible says we're saved by grace through faith, let's no one can boast.
Okay, we'll preach it.
Then why do I gotta confess?
Good question.
Glad you asked.
The reason why we confess is this.
What relationship in your life is so strong that you can look that person dead in the eyes and say, I blew it.
I failed.
I messed up.
I hope your relationship with your loved ones is that close.
But sometimes we have very few humans
that we can look dead in the face and confess our failures to.
We don't confess our sins to God for God's sake.
We confess them for our sake.
We confess them so we can admit to God.
We have messed up and then not hear rejection, but here you are forgiven.
That's why we confess.
The confession is not for God, it's for us.
So adoration, confession, thanksgiving, God thank you for what you've done.
Thank you.
You know, thank you for my family, for my friends, so on and so forth.
And then supplication, God be with the sick, God be with those who are needy.
So that acronym, A C T S is a great acronym that we can use to pray.
Adoration, confession, thanksgiving, supplication.
That's a good method.
That's helpful.
But prayer ultimately isn't about getting that right either.
Prayer is about what Paul told us today, realizing that we are in the presence of God.
Prayer is not about what we say.
Prayer is about entering into God's presence and feeling God's presence in our life.
understanding the effect that God is present with us always.
As Psalm 139 says, where could I flee from your presence?
Even if I make my bed in hell still there, you'll find me.
Well, you can't flee from God's presence.
And that ultimately is what prayer is.
It's not about the words we say or the prayers we read, but it is about the holy awareness of God's presence in our life.
And that God is present with us in that moment.
I went to seminary in Memphis, and there's a professor that I loved.
Dr. Nick was his name.
You better not say Matthew's for any length of time.
You probably heard me reference Dr. Nick.
Dr. Nick was a neat guy.
He was a charismatic Catholic.
He was a Catholic who spoke in tongues.
I bet you didn't know they made those, did you?
He was a neat guy.
He was the most spiritual man I ever met in my life.
And Dr. Nick, he had a brother who he loved who lived in El Paso.
And once a year his brother would come visit him in Memphis and they would, he would, when he'd visiting, they would spend time together.
They'd read the paper.
And so his wife Sandy would come in the mornings and find them eating breakfast, drinking coffee, but sitting in silence, like they would just be drinking coffee and eating their breakfast and just sitting there together.
And she asked him and said, Nick, you see your brother once a year.
Why don't you talk to him when he's here?
He said, Sandy.
We just enjoy being in each other's presence.
That's prayer, friends.
It is the understanding that we are in the presence of God.
So that's why I think this patch, it's just so beautiful.
Because what does he say here?
Paul says, do not worry about anything, but in everything,
By prayer and supplication, let your request be made known to God.
And the peace that passes all understanding will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.
I love that.
That's what prayer is.
It's taking everything to God.
Everything, your fears, your anxieties, your worries, your doubt, your children, everything.
Everything your health your family's health your parents health your children's health all the all the stuff all the stuff that were tempted to hide cuz he hears the thing y'all we hold on to so much don't we we hold on to so much and And the Lord the Lord cannot help you He cannot help you with the things that you refuse to release to him You cannot pray with closed fist to God You have to pray with open palms
releasing it to God.
You, He cannot help you with the things that you refuse to release to Him.
And by the way, the things that were tempted to hide, think about Adam and Eve.
When they were in the garden, when they were in the garden, and after they ate the fruit, the Lord says, hey guys, we're yet paraphrasing.
Hey guys, we're yet.
What are they doing?
They were hiding.
Okay, y'all, this is the God of all the universe.
Do you think he didn't know where they were?
Like, do you really think God does not know your worries?
Do you think you're that much smarter than God that you can hide that from him?
Do you really think God doesn't know your fears?
Do you really think that God doesn't know what's robbing your joy or robbing your peace?
Do you really think we can conveniently just hide that behind our back?
Oh God, there's nothing here.
God would rather us pray honest prayers than safe prayers.
Safe prayers are, oh God, everything's perfect.
Look at my Instagram, perfect life.
Everything is great.
Thank you God, amen.
That's safe prayers.
Honest prayers are sometimes like, God, this is terrible.
God, I don't know what you're doing.
This doesn't make a lick of sense.
I'm scared and I'm angry.
I don't know if any of y'all have ever seen the old movie, The Apostle with Robert Duvall.
Why am I not surprised?
You've seen it, Mike.
Why does that?
Isn't it a great movie?
Like in this movie,
Billy Bob Thornton gets saved, and it may be, it's one of the best things I cry when I watch it.
It's the most authentic conversion I've ever seen in my entire life.
So I'm not gonna, okay, it starts off, he kills his youth pastor, but let's be honest, who amongst us hadn't wanted to do that at some point?
Oh, sorry, maybe I didn't see there.
So, and then he's on the run from the cop for a lot of the rest of the movie.
It doesn't paint him as a perfect character.
But there's this one scene where he is, he went to his mom's house who is paid, played by Ruth Carter Cash and she's asleep and he's in the basement just yelling at God, just yelling.
And somebody calls his mom and says, Hey, what's going on?
Is there a mad man in your house?
She said, No, that's just sunny.
Sometimes he talks to God.
Sometimes he yells.
Tonight he's yelling.
That's an honest prayer.
Because you know what God is?
Big enough to handle it.
If we serve a God who is too small to handle our human frailties, how small of a God is that?
That's not the God of Scripture, friends.
That's not the God of Scripture.
The God of Scripture can handle all that we deal with.
All of our fears, all of our... That's what Paul says.
with prayer and supplication.
Don't worry about anything, but in everything by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your request be made known to God.
So take it to God.
Take it to God.
Take your fears, take your doubts, take your worries, take your concerns.
Well, but there's bigger things out there.
Well, everybody's got something, of course, but if it matters to you, it matters to God.
The Bible says,
that God knows the hairs on your hair on your head.
The Bible says, does not a sparrow fall from the sky that your father's not aware of?
We're like, oh, sweet little sparrows.
Y'all, sparrows were nasty.
They were rats with good PR.
Nobody likes sparrows if you committed a sin and you were too poor and too indigent and too broken down to afford a proper sacrifice
You sacrifice sparrows.
Sparrows are at the bottom of the food chain, literally, spiritually, and figuratively.
There's not a sparrow fall from the sky that your father's not aware of.
God loves you, friends.
Your concerns, your fears, your brokenness, they matter to God.
So we take these things to God
And then when we take these things to God, the peace that passes all understanding will guard our hearts and minds with Christ Jesus.
Well, the reason why these things guard our hearts and minds in Christ Jesus is because when we take them to God, we realize we serve a God who's big enough to handle them.
We serve a God who's big enough to handle our fears.
We serve a God who's big enough to handle what we released to Him.
When we let it go, we find we have a God who can handle it.
This world's hard, it did, y'all.
You don't believe me?
Just log on to Facebook.
Everybody's mad about something all the time.
And it's scary.
It's alienating.
It's divisive.
By the way, when you keep reading John 17, that chapter I talked about, the pastoral prayer, do you know what Jesus prays for twice in there, both for the apostles in that moment and for the church that is to come?
He says, I pray that they may be one as we are one.
Why is unity the first thing we throw out?
Jesus prayed for our unity.
One of my desires for St. Matthew's
It's for us to be a place where regardless of what you believe theologically, what you believe politically, what you believe in all these things, you can find a place to belong here.
There are not many places left in our world where that's the place.
That sounds great on bumper sticker.
Here's the problem.
You know the problem?
That is people are going to always be people.
If you're in relation with people who disagree with you, they're going to get on your nerve.
They're going to annoy you.
They're going to offend you.
They're going to make you angry.
And it's going to be very tempting and very easy to cut off relationship.
My friend Keith Keaton, who's a pastor in Hattiesburg, likes to say that being in relationship with those with whom you disagree is a means of grace because it makes us humble ourselves.
It makes us pray.
It makes us lean into each other and not away from each other.
And that's hard.
That is so hard.
So it depends upon Jesus for us to do that.
But when we give our concerns to Jesus, we find that we serve a God bigger than all of this.
I got bigger than I, and when we realized the vastness and the hugeness and the might and the strength and the power of God, what are these momentary things in this life, friends?
That thing right now that's dropping your peace, you're not even gonna think about it in a year from now, are you?
About five years from now.
About 10 years from now.
Where's it going to rank in the light of eternity?
These things that rob our peace, that rob our joy, that rob our strength, that rob our lives.
These things, where do they rank in the light of eternity?
They do not.
Turn your eyes upon Jesus.
Look full in his wonderful face and the things of this earth will grow strangely dim in the light of his glory and grace.
Cast your cares upon him because he cares for you.
And then that peace will guard your hearts and souls and minds in Christ Jesus.
Oh, at peace we often forfeit.
Oh, what needless pain we bear, all because we do not carry everything to God in prayer.
That's a prayer, yes.
Not about the words.
It's about the awareness.
One of my favorite verses that has changed
how much, so much of how I'll understand God.
It's Jesus's teaching and he says, if you who are sinful know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more does your perfect heavenly Father know how to give you good gifts?
I think about that a lot like if I'm gonna want the best for my children and I'm an imperfect person, how much more is God gonna want the best for me, right?
So one of the things I've heard, sometimes people talk about praying and this helps us to understand that it's about presence.
You ever been praying at night and fall asleep
And feel frustrated, like, come on, man, like Peter, can you not tear you one hour longer?
As a parent, what is more beautiful than having your child fall asleep in your arms?
And we're praying we drift off the sleep.
We're simply a trusting child falling asleep in the arms of our loving father.
Cast your cares upon God in this peace that passes all understanding will guard your heart's souls and minds in Christ Jesus.
He loves you.
He truly and deeply loves you.
And we cast all that we are upon Him.
We find the depth of His love for us.
Today, friends, know how deeply you are loved.
And the name of the Father and the Son, the Holy Spirit.
Let's pray.